321 backups advise to have:

- 3 backups in total
- 2 backups locally (i.e at home)
- 1 offsite e.g AWS/Backblaze b2 etc

To improve backups of my data I've setup:

- Synology Nas using synology hybrid raid
- Open Media Vault 
- Backblaze/gDrive/Dropbox via Rcloud

Rclone is really awesome - it gives a CLI interface to cloud storage and gives rsync like control as well as a mounted drive for the command line.

I'd recommend using this with [https://gist.github.com/kabili207/2cd2d637e5c7617411a666d8d7e97101](https://gist.github.com/kabili207/2cd2d637e5c7617411a666d8d7e97101)) . It handles automatically mounting the drive via systemd.

# Automation

* Power management - this is done as we don't need availability of the OpenMediaVault 24/7
	* Autostart via BIOS settings the OpenMediaVault server. 
	* Autoshutdown using OpenMediaVault settings.
* Cron jobs to run my backup shell script. This rsyncs across my data to the OpenMediaVault samba shares. 

# Additional safety
* SMART checks were added in to run daily on the OMV drive to attempt to pick up errors in advance
* OMV alerting configured

# Issues 
* If the files being cloned across are very large and the copy cannot be completed before the shutdown starts then a proper backup will not be achieved. *Not resolved 
* Hour changes. Due to the delights of the BST/GMT time zones, it turns out that the Bios respects hour changes while cron jobs do not! *Not resolved
* Should the copy try to move data across to the remote mounted drive and the server is offline this causes the server to copy data to the **local** filesystem and not the remote!  *See mitigation 1

# Mitigation
* To handle scenarios where the OMV server is offline, a check to the backup script has been added to identify that the server is responding to pings. If it is not then the backup script aborts. This prevents the cron job from copying the backup from the synology to the local disk instead of the OMV disk.

# Future work
* Monitoring/email alerts. Perhaps this could be done with grafana? 
* Data encryption - Some of my personal data in the cloud is not ideal. I didn't go with this initially as I wanted to avoid the situation where I have data failure + data backups but no access as I've lost the keys.
* Upgrade the synology to support JBOD disk array. Spanning was considered but upon further research this looks grim if a drive fails and data is copied across two of the drives.
* Try out trueNas
* Use either btrfs or ZFS to get familiarity with snapshots/versioning of files

